# MODEL0911270007: Karagiannis2004_CollagenIproteolysis

## Installation

Download this repository, and install with distutils

`python setup.py install`

Or, install using pip

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/MODEL0911270007.git`

To install a specific version (in this example, from the 2014-09-16 BioModels release)

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/MODEL0911270007.git@20140916`


# Model Notes


This a model from the article:  
**A theoretical model of type I collagen proteolysis by matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 2 and membrane type 1 MMP in the presence of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 2.**   
Karagiannis ED, Popel AS. _J Biol Chem_ 2004 Sep 10;279(37):39105-14
[15252025](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15252025) ,  
**Abstract:**   
One well documented family of enzymes responsible for the proteolytic
processes that occur in the extracellular matrix is the soluble and membrane-
associated matrix metalloproteinases. Here we present the first theoretical
model of the biochemical network describing the proteolysis of collagen I by
matrix metalloproteinases 2 (MMP2) and membrane type 1 matrix
metalloproteinases (MT1-MMP) in the presence of the tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinases 2 (TIMP2) in a bulk, cell-free, well stirred environment.
The model can serve as a tool for describing quantitatively the activation of
the MMP2 proenzyme (pro-MMP2), the ectodomain shedding of MT1-MMP, and the
collagenolysis arising from both of the enzymes. We show that pro-MMP2
activation, a process that involves a trimer formation of the proenzyme with
TIMP2 and MT1-MMP, is suppressed at high inhibitor levels and paradoxically
attains maximum only at intermediate TIMP2 concentrations. We also calculate
the conditions for which pro-MMP2 activation is maximal. Furthermore we
demonstrate that the ectodomain shedding of MT1-MMP can serve as a mechanism
controlling the MT1-MMP availability and therefore the pro-MMP2 activation.
Finally the proteolytic synergism of MMP2 and MT1-MMP is introduced and
described quantitatively. The model provides us a tool to determine the
conditions under which the synergism is optimized. Our approach is the first
step toward a more complete description of the proteolytic processes that
occur in the extracellular matrix and include a wider spectrum of enzymes and
substrates as well as naturally occurring or artificial inhibitors.

This model was taken from the [CellML
repository](http://www.cellml.org/models) and automatically converted to SBML.  
The original model was: [ **Karagiannis ED, Popel AS. (2004) - version01**
](http://www.cellml.org/models/karagiannis_popel_2004_version01)

This model originates from BioModels Database: A Database of Annotated
Published Models (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/). It is copyright (c)
2005-2011 The BioModels.net Team.  
To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

In summary, you are entitled to use this encoded model in absolutely any
manner you deem suitable, verbatim, or with modification, alone or embedded it
in a larger context, redistribute it, commercially or not, in a restricted way
or not..  
  
To cite BioModels Database, please use: [Li C, Donizelli M, Rodriguez N,
Dharuri H, Endler L, Chelliah V, Li L, He E, Henry A, Stefan MI, Snoep JL,
Hucka M, Le Nov√®re N, Laibe C (2010) BioModels Database: An enhanced, curated
and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic models. BMC Syst
Biol., 4:92.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20587024)


